10 November 2016 Brand South Africa will this week launch a digital campaign under the banner ”No Excuses’ in support of the annual global 16 Days for No Violence Against Women and Children. Brand South Africa calls on all citizens to support the campaign by wearing a white ribbon during the 16-day period to symbolise their pledge to not commit or condone violence against women or children. Commemorated annually, the 16 Days of No Violence Against Women and Children, aims to raise awareness of the negative impact that violence and abuse have on women and children and the country as a whole.  It further aims to encourage people to stop violence against women and children Brand South Africa’s GM for Marketing, Ms Sithembile Ntomebla said: “The 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children campaign challenges South Africans to declare a truce on violence against women and children - and, ultimately, turn this into 365 days of non-violence against women and children.” The global campaign which runs from 25 November - International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women and Children through to International Human Rights Day on 10 December, is premised on these specific dates to emphasize the links between ending gender-based violence and human rights principles.  This period includes International Aids Day to raise awareness of how HIV and Aids impacts on the lives of women and children. The 16 Days on No Violence against Women and Children finds expression in South Africa’s Constitution and other policies which call on all stakeholders to play their part to create a society characterised by equity and fairness for women, children and other vulnerable groups. “It is the responsibility of government, business, civil society organisations, faith-based organisations, communities and the media to drive to increase awareness of the negative impact of violence and abuse on women and children, and speak out against woman and child abuse,” added Ms Ntombela. The campaign also aims to challenge the perpetrators of violence to change their behaviour, involve men in helping to eradicate violence, as well as provide survivors with information on services and organisations that can help lessen the impact of violence on their lives. For more information on how to participate in the campaign, follow the conversation on #NoExcuses. For more information or to set up interviews, please contact: Tsabeng NthiteTel: 011 712 5061Cell: 076 371 6810E-mail:tsabengn@brandsouthafrica.com Issued by Brand South Africa