26 August 2016The Deputy Minister of Communications, Ms Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, launched the First Graduate Foundation Friendraiser in East London on Friday, 26 August 2016.Aimed at ensuring that young girls from rural communities achieve university endorsement grades in high school, the foundation is targeting first generation learners those whose family and siblings have never been to university. The launch was attended by about 100 local business people, professionals and academia with a resonating theme, lest we forget the girls that we left behind. The Deputy Minister welcomed the initiative which seeks to empower the young rural girls to develop a self-identity and prosper in a world full of opportunities. Education is not only a government matter, but a societal responsibility. We therefore have to ensure that we increase the uptake of subjects which will enable our children to have skills which respond to the market requirements, said Ndabeni-Abrahams.Three groups of 15 20 excelling young girls in grade 9 and from rural communities, will undergo the foundation s maths and science summer academic support programme. Speaking at the launch, Dr Noluthando Toni from the University of Fort Hare raised the importance of providing complimentary support to higher education. We are preparing our daughters to be independent thinkers who are not only employable, but possess entrepreneurial knowledge and skills, she said.The First Graduate Foundation is led by three enterprising women from the rural communities of Eastern Cape. Yolisa Siqoko, Yandisa Soqaba and Qonqeka Zantsi, commenced the foundation with a vision to help first generation rural girl learners to achieve university acceptable grades at high school level. This, they envisage, will be attained through the support of the community by becoming friendraisers, champions, donors and volunteers. The Deputy Minister pledged that in support of the programme, the Department of Communications will sponsor the foundation with a telematic system, to be installed at a selected school for the summer camp. As a platinum contributor, she will also host one friendraiser event on an annual basis. The first annual summer camp will take place in September 2016.Enquiries: Nthabeleng Mokitimi-Dlamini Cell: 073 222 5522Issued by Department of Communications