4 October 2016Brand South Africa brings together the theory and practice on Nation BrandingBrand South Africa will tomorrow Wednesday 5 October 2016 host the inaugural University Dialogue which will see academics and other stakeholders deliberate on the theory and practice of the discipline of Nation Branding.This conversation is significant because the concept of nation branding is relatively new. The discipline is also both complicated and nuanced. In this regard, theorists agree that while the complexity of nations makes it difficult to brand them, the techniques of marketing and branding can be applied to manage the image, reputation and perceptions of the nation. In addition, in respect of building and positioning a Nation Brand, a country must define what it stands for so that it can market and communicate itself cohesively. Describing and positioning the complexity of the nation is something with which many brand strategists are seized.Finally, nation brands are a composite of everything the country does, says and represents. All institutions and citizens come together to form the Nation Brand.In light of this, Brand South Africa has convened the inaugural University Dialogue with the University of Pretoria, which will bring together a range of leading academics who will deliberate on how South Africa is currently positioned, whether this positioning is positive or negative, what is working, how the various elements of the brand impact on the Nation Brand positioning.This discussion will yield well researched approaches firmly grounded on empirical studies which will provide Brand South Africa with a solid basis from which to critique the work currently executed, with a range of stakeholders, in positioning South Africa competitively and positively.Brand South Africa will critically evaluate the papers presented at the Dialogue and will look at positive interventions which can be implemented to position the Nation Brand positively.Media is invited to attend this dialogue as follows:Date: Wednesday 5 October 2016 Time: 09h00 Venue: University of Pretoria, Senate Hall Entrance on University Road entrance (opposite the Gautrain line and the Loftus Train Station, marked as 12 on the attached map)RSVPS/Enquiries: Tsabeng Nthite Cell: 076 371 6810 E-mail: tsabengn@brandsouthafrica.comFollow the conversation on #SANationBrandBrand South Africa will be pleased to facilitate any requests for interviews.Note to editorsContributions at the Inaugural University DialogueProf George AngelopuloTitle: The competitive brand position of South Africa s cities: national, continental and global perspectives The South African brand is the mental perception that people have of the country and its attributes. For the 65% of South Africans living in towns and cities, these perceptions are filtered by their urban experience. Cities are pivots of formal and informal economic activity, private and public sector jobs. They concentrate economic opportunity and access to social benefits such as education and health services. For many people living in cities, urban affiliation is stronger and more meaningful than an increasingly abstract and distant national affiliation. Cities hold many benefits but in the rapid transformation that characterises South Africa s cities there are also significant challenges. Urbanisation is swift and largely uncontrolled, with growing slums and informal settlements, unequal access to urban services, significant climate impact and rising inequality. South Africa s cities play an increasingly important role in the destiny of the country and this paper considers the significance of city brands in the overall perception of South Africa. It assesses their competitive positions within South Africa, in Africa and across the globe, and it does so with a measure that is relevant to a wide spectrum of stakeholders of the South African brand - national and international business, institutions, government and its citizens. Prof Justine Burns and Mr Lindokuhle NjozelaTitle: Towards measuring social cohesion in South Africa This paper uses data collected across the four waves of the National Income Dynamics Study (NIDS) to construct a measure of social cohesion for South Africa. We compare our index to one derived using the Afrobarometer data and find a large degree of consistency in trends in the index and its constituent components over time across the two datasets. However, there is less consistency in the measures once one moves to lower levels of geographic disaggregation. We also find far less variability in the constructed index relying on NIDS panel data as opposed to the repeated cross-sections from Afrobarometer. Having derived the index, we then correlate it with a variety of indicators of social and economic well-being. We show that higher levels of education, per capita income and employment are positively associated with higher social cohesion whilst social cohesion is negatively associated with poverty, service delivery protest and perceptions of crime. In addition, municipal policy and competence are closely associated with higher social cohesion. Whilst this work is exploratory, it is encouraging, and suggests new opportunities for future research to begin to take seriously the link between social cohesion and economic and social development.Prof Scarlett CornelissenTitle: Afro-modernity and exceptionalism: State branding and foreign policy in post-apartheid South Africa A consistent element in post-apartheid South African foreign policy and in its domestic politics has been the projection of a particular view of modernity. Expressed through grand narratives of African revival and potential, and aimed at casting a particular idea of itself and of the wider African continent, this view has shaped the country s international engagements as well as political dynamics in the domestic arena. This projection of Afro-modernity , I argue, is a form of state branding pursued by South Africa s elites that has had diplomatic, economic and societal objectives. It has been part of South Africa s processes of state-making and nation-making over the past two decades, reflected in its foreign policy and in attempts to effect national reconciliation. This paper investigates how this specific form of state branding has taken shape. It discusses how Afro-modernity has been enacted in the spheres of international and domestic politics through narratives of diplomacy, boosterish imaging campaigns and hallmark (or mega-) events.Prof Nadia KanevaTitle: The branded national imagination and its limitis: Insights from the post-socialist experience Nation branding has gained significant attention in business, policy, and academic circles since the late 1990s. Faced with the pressures of globalization, countries around the world have invested in various branding programs in the hopes of gaining a competitive advantage within a global marketplace. At the same time, nation branding has been touted as a tool for nation-building efforts that aim to generate national unity and pride. My focus in this presentation is on this latter claim and its political and cultural implications. I trace the limits of branding as a tool for re-constructing nations as imagined communities (Anderson 1983). I analyze the discourses and practices of nation branding from a critical cultural perspective, rooted in the theoretical traditions of political economy and cultural studies. I draw on examples from post-socialist Eastern Europe, which underwent dramatic economic, political, and cultural transformations after the unraveling of the Soviet bloc in 1989. In my discussion, I consider the impact of nation branding on national identity and democratic governance in that region. Ultimately, I argue that, in the post-socialist context, nation branding served to depoliticize efforts at collective self-redefinition by subordinating national identity to market-oriented and outward-facing concerns. This has led, in many cases, to a nationalist backlash, which challenges the principles of European integration and globalization. I propose that, while we must retain a keen awareness of local histories and legacies, we can find instructive insights in the post-socialist experience that can inform our understanding of the limitations of the branded national imagination in other post-conflict and post-colonial contexts.Prof Nicola Kleyn and Mr Tendai MhizhaTitle: Exploring the role of business in nation branding: Observations from South Africa Since the formal use of the term by independent policy advisor Simon Anholt in 1996, nation branding has attracted the attention of scholars across a range of disciplines including marketing, management, tourism studies, international and public relations, media and cultural studies. Despite the growing body of multi-disciplinary scholarship on the construct, the contribution of business to building (and sometimes destroying) nation brand equity appears to have received little consideration in the academic literature. The purpose of this article is to explore the role of business in nation branding. We adopt a constructivist perspective to nation branding and use stakeholder theory to argue that business has an important role to play in influencing both internal and external perceptions of nation brands. Following an overview of literature on nation branding, we introduce literature from the fields of marketing and management to position the role of business in nation branding. We show that business influences nation brands in a number of direct and indirect ways. We specifically consider the direct contributions that business can make to nation branding. These include the marketing of brands with country of origin effects, internal branding that directly supports nation building and the nation brand and, developing active partnerships both within business and between business and government to promote positive perceptions of the nation brand. We use secondary data sources to provide examples situated in the South African context that illustrate examples of businesses that have both contributed to and detracted from the South African nation brand. We summarise these into a descriptive framework that illustrates ways in which business shapes nation brands. We conclude with suggestions for both practice as well as future research. Prof Garth L le PereTitle: Ubuntu as foreign policy: The ambiguities of brand image and identity South Africa s 2011 White Paper on foreign policy, Building a Better World , is predicated on the far-reaching ambition of how the philosophy of Ubuntu and its underlying humanist principles will guide the country s external relations. However and while noble, this calculus is poorly conceived as an approach to global issues in a context where the dictates of competitive realism and national interest hold increasing sway. This paper will argue that while still a relatively successful nation brand if measured by reputation and marketing indicators, South Africa s normative currency in foreign policy and international relations has depreciated considerably, with a direct bearing on its reputation. This will be examined through two analytical and normative prisms: that of South Africa s ontological security and its ontological personality. These provide a register of the branding and image deficits related to the White Paper and will be assessed on the basis of three continuums: the strategic, the substantive, and the symbolic. The paper will conclude with the observation that South Africa needs to reclaim its normative resilience in foreign policy and international relations precisely because without such resilience its brand image and identity will suffer and inevitably deteriorate.Prof Mageshen NaidooTitle: Jazz in South Africa and the art of developing improvisers The story of jazz in South Africa is intertwined with our history of colonisation and our struggle for freedom during the apartheid era. Out of this struggle and refined in the townships, emerged a style we call African jazz or Mbaganga. Jazz is an adaptable language that accommodates idiomatic infusions from everywhere. Strategies for engagement within a jazz ensemble, including the techniques of improvisation may be utilized to develop future leaders and communities. Prof Mzukisi QoboTitle: South Africa s national brand in the African context: How South Africa projects its regional leadership Whether they know it or not, countries are viewed through the lens of branding. Their brand equity lies in the norms and ideas that they are promoting, as well as the actors (leaders) who champion such ideas and norms. Countries embody signs, beliefs, values, and imageries about what they stand for in the global system. They also cultivate their brand equity through various repertoires, including mega-sporting events, active involvement in global governance processes, hosting of major conferences or summits, or concerted efforts to promote themselves as destinations, including for tourists and investors. As such, they carry a particular emblem that abbreviates their identity, ideas, values and norms. This paper focuses on the regional dimensions of South Africa s projection of its brand value and leadership. This is precisely because regions are crucial platforms for countries through which countries project their ideas, norms and leadership. It is also here that they build their brand equity. As such, this paper examines the kinds of norms that South Africa projects through the region, and understand how these are perceived. Further, it analyses the predominant ideas that South Africa articulates, for example, in the context of regional integration as well how these are perceived. Finally, it makes an assessment of the country s leadership projection in the region, and the kind of reaction this elicits to evaluate whether or not they reinforce brand equity. In sum, regional integration processes will be a back-drop against which to measure South Africa s brand equity.About Brand South AfricaBrand South Africa is the official marketing agency of South Africa, with a mandate to build the country's brand reputation, in order to improve its global competitiveness. Its aim is also to build pride and patriotism among South Africans, in order to contribute to social cohesion and nation brand ambassadorship.Join the conversation at: Follow Brand South Africa @Brand_SA https://twitter.com/Brand_SATell us how you Play Your Part @PlayyourpartSA http://www.playyourpart.co.za/tellus-someone https://www.facebook.com/BrandSouthAfricaFor more information or to set up interviews, please contact: Manusha Pillai Tel: 011 712 5004 Mobile: 082 389 3587 E-mail:manushap@brandsouthafrica.com Visit www.brandsouthafrica.comIssued by Brand South Africa