18 October 2016 Presentation by the Minister of Communications, Ms AF Muthambi on the occasion of the presentation of 2015/16 Annual Report and Audited Annual Financial Statements of Media Development And Diversity Agency (MDDA) in Parliament, 18 October 2016 Honourable Chairperson and Members,Context of the MDDA Mandate and its Role in Society Media diversity in any country is regarded as a measure of the depth of its democracy. Every citizen should have access to a range of media. To deepen media diversity, Government partnered with commercial print and broadcast media entities to assist the Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA), which is tasked with providing financial and non-financial support to community and small commercial media projects throughout the country. The objective of the MDDA is to ensure that all citizens can access information in a language of their choice and to transform media access, ownership and control patterns in South Africa. This is done in order to redress exclusion and marginalisation of disadvantaged communities and persons from access to the media and the media industry to promote media development and diversity by providing support primarily to community and small commercial media project. We do this because the media has a critical role to play in aiding good governance, transparency and accountability.  Hence, a pluralistic and free media sector, is needed to ensure that all voices in society are heard. Without a wide array of information, people’s opinions and views would be limited and their impressions and conclusions of the world around them stunted. Honourable Chairperson and Members,As the Ministry of Communications, we applaud the MDDA for its continued efforts in the advocacy and campaign to make the media literacy a priority on its agenda as well as accelerating media literacy efforts. The Media Literacy and Culture of Reading Summit is an event which MDDA implements annually which features a number of young people in our schools. The aim of the summit is to introduce a culture of reading and basic media literacy amongst learners in schools, to promote debate and dialogue on media for learners and to encourage them to be media aware and be involved in producing their own media. The media literacy efforts are in line with the United Nations Literacy Decade (UNLD) that took place in New York in February 2003 which highlighted the importance of media literacy. Funding ChallengesChairpersonThere is a tremendous demand for MDDA support, which in turn requires an increase in funding. To this end, the Agency has reported to this Committee that it receives more than R 150 million worth of applications, which suggests that without increased funding, the Agency will fail to support initiatives aimed at giving effect to both the MDDA Act and section 16 of the Constitution. It must also be emphasised that the MDDA support is needed on an ongoing basis especially in rural areas and also in areas where there is not much of economic activities taking place. Most of the communities served by MDDA, their  projects have few economic prospects, with high unemployment, and are beset by problems such as lack of access to basic services, and access to media which could serve as a platform to raise awareness around these issue The point is that whilst community media are not profit-making enterprises, they are not for bankruptcy either!  The fact is that, we need advertising revenues to flourish in these community media projects, however, we also know communities in the country where there is no advertising revenues to be generated and such challenges poses a major risk to the financial self-sustainability of these projects. In addition, community media are themselves in¬creasingly seen as small enterprises with a responsibility to survive and sustain high quality community service. Therefore training in business and newsroom management to support the financial operations, and other forms should continue to be provided by the MDDA to ailing projects in order to sustain the sector. Therefore government has to urgently review the funding model of the Agency. In the interim, however, as the Ministry, we welcome the finalisation of the MoU between the MDDA and Small Enterprise Development Agency (SEDA) to roll out an enterprise development programme across the country. FUNDING SHORTAGE AND CALL FOR LEGISLATIVE GAPS, AND THE NEED TO LEVEL THE PLAYING FIELD IN THE SECTORHonourable Chairperson and Members,The funding agreements with broadcasting service licensees are aligned to the ICASA regulation and each broadcast licensee contributes 0.2% of their annual turnover of licensed activities.  The funding from the mainstream commercial print media on the other hand, is not regulated which to us, amounts to a gentlemen’s agreement.For the year under review, there is no funding from this sector at all and in turn this impact negatively on funding for community print media. Engagement with the sector is ongoing to find a lasting solution. REVIEWING THE OF MDDA MANDATEHonourable Chairperson and Members,With the Agency now in operation for over a decade, an Impact Assessment Study has been commissioned to reflect and evaluate the extent to which the MDDA is responding to its mandate, the impact of MDDA funded projects and identifying and sharing best practices. The Agency will share the findings of the study with Members, once the research has been completed at the end of the 2016/17 financial year. ON KEY PERFORMANCE TARGETS AND CHALLENGES DURIND THE 2015/16 FINANCIAL YEARHonourable Chairperson and Members,Governance mattersThe terms of office of some Board members came to an end in 2015/2016, As such I would like to thank those members who left the Board during the year for their contributions. ACHIEVEMENTS OF PLANNED TARGETS OVERALL PERFORMANCE: PROGRAMME 2: GRANT FUNDING AND NON-FINANCIAL SUPPORTThe roll-over funds from the 2014/15 financial year approved by National Treasury enabled the MDDA to support more projects, hence some targets have been exceeded. In some instances, partnership forged with SAASTA resulted in more budget being available. ADVERTISING REVENUE SKEWED TO COMMUNITY BROADCASTING AND INTERVENTION REQUIRED  Government has increased its advertising spend on community media from 22 million in 2012/13 financial year to R 36 million in the 2015/16 financial year, we are concerned that the bulk of this budget goes to community broadcast. We have instructed the MDDA and GCIS to correct this abnormal situation. Honourable Chairperson and MembersMAJOR CHALLENGES ENCOUNTRED DURING THE 2015/16 FINANCIAL YEAR PLANNED TARGETSStaff Complement During the 2015/16 financial year, the total staff compliment for the MDDA was sixteen (16) .Of the 32 approved positions to be filled, the vacancy rate was at 50%.The MDDA’s organogram was reviewed to be aligned with its new strategy, this led to the decision not to fill all vacant and funded positions. This led to sixteen (16) employees serving in all projects which are spread across the country. The staff complement negatively affected the achievements of major service delivery areas especially in relation to compliance with laws and regulations which are key in ensuring good governance. This was also raised by the Auditor General of South Africa Other Human Resources ChallengesDue to staff turn-over in the Human Resources Unit, MDDA did not submit the Annual Skills Report as well as the Workplace Skills Plan to the Department of Labour in contravention of the associated laws Honourable Chairperson and MembersCompliance with Laws and RegulationsThe MDDA failed to comply with laws and regulations and this is evidenced by the failure to submit the EMP 2011 UIF payments due to the absence of Acting CFO due to ill-health. There was no adherence to Supply Chain Management Policy, PPPFA, PFMA and Treasury Regulations, this is because for the most part of the financial year, critical positions in Finance and Supply Chain were not filled, and therefore standard procedures were not followed. The positions have been subsequently filed. The number of procurement plans were not submitted to National Treasury and at Board level the planned meetings did not take place as planed as the MDDA did not have an IT advisory committee chairperson to identify gaps in the IT environment. This has subsequently been addressed with the appointment of the Chairperson. Additional InformationHonourable Chairperson and MembersThe Agency has always received an unqualified audit outcome (clean audits for more than 4 consecutive years) with very limited findings and the current financial year is no exception. However, the following issues were never really performed to the satisfaction of the AGSA.  The following contains the summarised version which formed the basis for the unqualified audit outcome  . Annual Financial statements Procurement and Contract Management Expenditure Management Internal Controls: Leadership-The Accounting Officer did not have sufficient monitoring controls in place to ensure compliance with the relevant laws and regulations. Financial and performance management Issued by: Department of Communications